PAGE: how to submit a package to pyOS (#424)
pyOpenSci/pyopensci.github.io: _pages/how-to-submit.md

---

> layout: splash

Reviewer: @kierisi i lied - one more comment outside of a content review - you mentioned the TOC... can you try one more thing. i suspect the TOC isn't available for the splash page layout. this is because that layout is a flowing layout not intended to have indexable sections. Try to make this a "single" layout page and see what happens. you can always use the wide class like we do with blogs.

Author: @lwasser that did it! I commit those changes and it should be formatted now.

Reviewer: perfect!! yay!

### Publication Options

One of the benefits of submitting your package to pyOpenSci for review is that once it's approved, it can be fast-tracked for publication with [JOSS](https://joss.theoj.org/). JOSS accepts pyOpenSci's review as theirs, and therefore you will not need to go through another full review. Instead, JOSS will only review your paper.md file.

### Are you OK with Reviewers Submitting Issues and/or pull requests to your Repo Directly?

You'll notice that the section on having reviewers submit requested changes as issues to your package repositories is already checked. You do have the option of un-checking it, but we consider the benefits of this to be that people can contribute to your review repos. Open issues, PRs, etc. all help you as a maintainer, while also giving you the opportunity to address any issues via PR links.

### Please fill out our survey

> We know that surveys aren't necessarily your favorite thing to do, but completing the [pyOpenSci pre-review survey]((https://forms.gle/F9mou7S3jhe8DMJ16)) is a huge help to our team of volunteers, future package authors, and pyOpenSci as an organization. It helps us track submissions as well as continuously improve our peer review process.

Reviewer: This is causing the other lychee issue i believe. 

```suggestion
We know that surveys aren't necessarily your favorite thing to do, but completing the [pyOpenSci pre-review survey](https://forms.gle/F9mou7S3jhe8DMJ16) is a huge help to our team of volunteers, future package authors, and pyOpenSci as an organization. It helps us track submissions as well as continuously improve our peer review process.
```

Reviewer: i'll do a full review (as a proper review) in a bit! i just wanted to check the pr structure which looks excellent!! nicely done!

Author: sounds good, and thank you! I'm glad to have finally (and hopefully) gotten to the bottom of my github issues!

* Italicizing text, using a single asterisk on each side of the text to be italicized: *this text is italicized*.

> New to Markdown? Here's a great [Markdown Guide](https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/) that covers all of the basic syntax.

## <i class="fa-solid fa-map"></i> Step-by-step guide to completing the pyOpenSci software review issue template

When completing your package submission, it's best to submit the issue all at once, rather than completing it over the course of several sessions. We recommend reading through the issue once or twice to see what information you'll need, which includes:

* The scope of your package (see categories)
* Your target audience
* Scientific applications of your package
* Other packages that accomplish the same thing (if any), and how yours is different

> Remember: keep the formatting of the issue template exactly as it is! It's OK to leave sections that don't apply to you blank, and there's no need to add any additional formatting (bolding, italicizing, etc.). Any of these types of changes make it more difficult for our editorial team to process your package submission.

### Package metadata

> * **Add a title:** keep your title simple. Oftentimes your package name and the word submission is enough, such as "My Amazing Python package submission."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Add a title:** keep your title simple. Oftentimes your package name and the word submission is enough, such as "packageName Submission."
```

you can also provide a link to the softwar-esubmission repo for them to look at other titles. or a screen show of what others have done would work too.

> * **Add a description** in this section you'll want to fill out the Submitting Author, All current maintainers, Package Name, One-Line Description of Package, Repository Link, and Version submitted sections. You should *not* fill out the EiC, Editor, Reviewer 1, Reviewer 2, Archive, JOSS DOI, Version accepted, or Date accepted sections. Instead, leave these as is, with "TBD."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Fill out the package submission metadata** in this section you'll want to fill out the Submitting Author, All current maintainers, Package Name, One-Line Description of Package, Repository Link, and Version submitted sections. You should *not* fill out the EiC, Editor, Reviewer 1, Reviewer 2, Archive, JOSS DOI, Version accepted, or Date accepted sections. Instead, leave these as is, with "TBD."
```

a screen shot would be helpful here too so they can see what it looks like both before and after it is submitted. if you want to submit a dummy issue you can just form the software-submission repo and create an issue on your fork to use for this page. or you can take screen shots of an existing package submission which is even better!

### Code of Conduct & Commitment to Maintain Package

> In order for your package to progress through the pyOpenSci review process, you'll need to check both of the [Code of Conduct](https://www.pyopensci.org/handbook/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.html) agreement as well as the [maintenance agreement](https://www.pyopensci.org/software-peer-review/our-process/policies.html#after-acceptance-package-ownership-and-maintenance) outlined in the [pyOpenSci Policies Guidelines](https://www.pyopensci.org/software-peer-review/about/intro.html). You can indicate your agreement in one of two ways:

Reviewer: This feels like we are telling them something they will know but not the context.This sectino would be more useful if it was a statement along the lines of:

all participants of our peer review process need to follow the pyOpenSci CoC... 

then add a short sentence about why this is important to us and our values 

For the long term maintenance - it would be important to reference here why we have that box - we want scientists to be able to find vetted maintained tools, etc. So rather than just telling them what to check, i think a bit of information on why this aligns with our organization and program values is important. it can be short! but it should be here and it's more important than the labels and markdown pieces.

when we write we should always be aligning our values to content delivery and approach.

* adding an "X" (without quotation marks) inside the brackets in the Markdown version of the issue, so that it reads like this: [X]
* submitting the issue without making any changes to this section, and then clicking on the checkboxes when they're rendered in the submitted issue.

### Description

> This section is where you'll provide a brief description of your package. It's helpful to include information on what your package does, and how it helps to benefit the open science community. Sharing information about what your package allows users to do helps us get a clearer idea on the scope of your package, as well as help us identify editors and reviewers who will be a good fit for your review.

Reviewer: A few examples of well filled out templates would be useful here - maybe a screen shot and then a few links. ask the editorial team for issues that provide examples that are well filled out!

### Scope

> The mission of pyOpenSci’s open peer review process is to:

Reviewer: i think this section should be simpler and the context / mission related stuff would be better fit higher up on this page. here you can just tell the user to select the scope categories that best align with their tools goals. They can pick one or more but if it's data viz they should submit a pre-submission inquiry.  

For the how-to around this scope section, I would not copy content from the template because it will become quickly dated if we enhance the scope. You could provide a few examples and link to the template for all of the items.

* **Data validation and testing:** refers to tools that enable automated validation and checking of data quality and completeness that in turn support scientific workflows.
* **Data visualization:** these are packages that enhance a scientist’s experience in visualizing and analyzing data. If your package falls into the category of data visualization, please fill out a [pre-submission inquiry](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/new?assignees=&labels=0%2Fpresubmission&template=presubmission-inquiry.md&title=) first.
* **Workflow automation:** these tools automate and link together workflows, and as such support reproducible workflows. These tools may include build systems and tools to manage continuous integration, as well as support version control.
* **Citation management and bibliometrics:** these are packages that facilitate managing references.
* **Scientific software wrappers:** these tools provide a Python interface for existing scientific packages written in other languages.
* **Database interoperability:** these packages deal with bindings and wrappers for database APIs.

> Similar to the previous section, you can indicate which categories are applicable to your package in one of two ways:

Reviewer: This is nice - turn it into a breakout using a .notice block given it's supporting information.

* adding an "X" (without quotation marks) inside the brackets in the Markdown version of the issue, so that it reads like this: [X]
* submitting the issue without making any changes to this section, and then clicking on the checkboxes when they're rendered in the submitted issue.

> You can read more about each of these categories in the [Package Scope](https://www.pyopensci.org/software-peer-review/index.html) section of the [pyOpenSci Peer Review Guide](https://www.pyopensci.org/software-peer-review/about/package-scope.html).

Reviewer: Yes this is good. so i'd move the mission content to the top of the page and then just describe what needs to happen here as a step in the process

* check any scope categories that fit...
* if it's data viz....

you are now ready to move on to the next step!

> ### Domain specific

Reviewer: So i think where i'm getting hung up here is that the headers are the sections in the template ... i think breaking this down into steps would be really helpful

for example:
`### Step x: Select any scope categories that relate to your package`

There might be other alternatices but i'm looking for a way to add stronger structure and more descriptive / useful headings to this page.

This section is currently evolving, and it's OK if your package doesn't fit into a specific listed domain.

### Community Partnerships

> Similar to the Domain specific section, our Community Partnerships are continuously growing and changing, and it's OK if your package isn't affiliated with one of the listed partners.

Reviewer: This is an ideal spot to write 2-4 sentences on the peer review partnership program why it's important and what value it adds.  link to the program and add a graphic. and then tell them if they are related to any of the current partners they should check the box. if they aren't sure they can ping an editor.

### For all submissions

This section is important, as it helps us more holistically evaluate your package and determine whether or not it's a good fit for pyOpenSci review. Each of the following sections should be addressed/answered:
* *Explain how and why the package falls under the categories you indicated above.* Here's where you'll provide us with information that connects your package and its functionality to both its domain and technical capabilities.
* *Who is the target audience and what are scientific applications of this package?* This helps us understand who will be using the package.
* *Are there other Python packages that accomplish the same thing? If so, how does yours differ?* This helps us get a handle on other packages that fall within the same domain, as well as ensure that efforts aren't being duplicated.
* *If you made a pre-submission enquiry, please paste the link to the corresponding issue, forum post, or other discussion, or `@tag` the editor you contacted.* This is an important section, as it links your pre-submission inquiry with your submission.

### Technical checks

> It's important that your package meet each of the qualifications in this section. If you are missing one or more of these items, you can learn more about how to implement them in our [pyOpenSci Packaging Guide](https://www.pyopensci.org/python-package-guide/). Taken as a whole, these components represent best practices in Python packaging, and as such its important that they be present in all pyOpenSci-approved packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section contains a list of community-developed core elements that all pyOpenSci Python packages should have such as documentation, tests and continuous integration setup. These package elements ensure that your package is both easier to maintain, easier to contribute to and documented well enough that a new user can get started using your package without too much additional guidance. 

It's important that your package meet each of the qualifications in this section. If you are missing one or more of these items, you can learn more about how to implement them in our [pyOpenSci Packaging Guide](https://www.pyopensci.org/python-package-guide/) or you can ask a question on our Discourse forum. 
```

i think in general it would be good for sections that aren't clear to at the top - 
1. define briefly in a few sentences why that section exists in our template and then 
3. lower down, explain any elements of it that may be unclear. 

...Being sure to try to align with our mission and values where ever you can. And also try to emphasize that tehse things aren't random, they are community developed. 

What i've rewritten here tries to do that for the Techincal checks section.

### Publication Options

> One of the benefits of submitting your package to pyOpenSci for review is that once it's approved, it can be fast-tracked for publication with [JOSS](https://joss.theoj.org/). JOSS accepts pyOpenSci's review as theirs, and therefore you will not need to go through another full review. Instead, JOSS will only review your paper.md file.

Reviewer: mention that publication means a citable entity (a doi) - the value here to align with is getting credit for the hard work of building and maintaining a software packa

### Are you OK with Reviewers Submitting Issues and/or pull requests to your Repo Directly?

> You'll notice that the section on having reviewers submit requested changes as issues to your package repositories is already checked. You do have the option of un-checking it, but we consider the benefits of this to be that people can contribute to your review repos. Open issues, PRs, etc. all help you as a maintainer, while also giving you the opportunity to address any issues via PR links.

Reviewer: Can you please re-read and reword a bit? id lead with the benefits / the why this section is there. Then tell them if they don't want issues and pr's they can uncheck it. as written it seems to combine these messages in a hard to digest way. 

we like to use the open source approach to github where ever we can. so linking issues and pr's to a review just makes the entire process more transparent in the spirit of our values. it also can help the maintianer directly if a pr is submitted!

### Please fill out our survey

> We know that surveys aren't necessarily your favorite thing to do, but completing the [pyOpenSci pre-review survey](https://forms.gle/F9mou7S3jhe8DMJ16) is a huge help to our team of volunteers, future package authors, and pyOpenSci as an organization. It helps us track submissions as well as continuously improve our peer review process.

Reviewer: Id lead with the positive. pyOpenSci is a non profit organization that deeply cares about improving our volunteer lead peer review process. Your feedback both before and after the review helps us.... more here...

Then thank them for their timing in helping us.

### Editor and Review templates

> This isn't a section that you need to worry about! In fact, this is a great time to read through your issue one last time, and hit submit.

Reviewer: You could describe briefly why there are there as these are just links for editors and reviewers.

## <i class="fa-solid fa-hourglass"></i> What’s next: what happens after you submit your package for review

> Now that you've submit your package to pyOpenSci's peer review process, you can relax for a bit. Our Editor-in-Chief will review your submission for both its scope and infrastructure, and determine whether or not it's a good fit for pyOpenSci. This process generally takes about two weeks, but may be shorter or longer depending on how many packages pyOpenSci currently has in review. The Editor-in-Chief will also use this time to ask for any necessary changes that may need to be made to your package, as well as give you time to implement them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you've submit your package to pyOpenSci's peer review process, you can relax for a bit. Our current Editor-in-Chief will review your submission for both its scope and infrastructure, and determine whether or not it's a good fit for pyOpenSci. This process generally takes about two weeks, but may be shorter or longer depending on how many packages pyOpenSci currently has in review. The Editor-in-Chief will also use this time to ask for any necessary changes that may need to be made to your package, as well as give you time to implement them.
```

Reviewer: it would be nice to add links to the EiC page in the guidebook here.

> Once the Editor-in-Chief has decided to move ahead with your package, we begin the review process with both editors and reviewers. On average, this takes approximately three months, but this timeframe can vary considerably depending on the package. You can read the detailed steps of what happens during the peer review process in the [pyOpenSci Peer Review Guide for Python Open Source Authors](https://www.pyopensci.org/software-peer-review/how-to/author-guide.html).

Reviewer: add link:
https://www.pyopensci.org/software-peer-review/our-process/review-timeline.html
